---
layout: post
title: "Securing your Smartphone: 3 - Tracking"
---

<br /><span style="font-size:70%;"><i>Disclaimer: This blog is intended to be of help for the average person to improve the security of their data and to raise awareness of information security and how to reduce the amount of personal data collected about people. I am not an expert in computer security; if you are working in a situation where information security is critical or required, I strongly suggest you look elsewhere...</i></span>

### Tracking
**Problem:** Apps can track you using an alphanumeric ID that is specific to your device, called an Advertising ID. This means that if you watch an advert for example, and the app detects that you are interested in it, the app may sell this information to large companies. The data about what you are doing in the app, how long you are looking at adverts, and what ads interest you is very valuable for companies that target adverts at you. Applications may also collect data about how you are using the application, how much time you are spending on it, and your device specifications which it may send off to the developer.<br />
**Solution:** I have not personally researched much on this aspect, however I do definitely recommend using TrackerControl. This app is available from the Google Play Store, HOWEVER it does not block trackers due to the strict policies of Google Play. To get the version that blocks trackers, you must first install FDroid, which is a very useful app store and will prove essential in the effort to improve the security of your phone. All apps on FDroid are open-source, meaning they are free, and anyone can see how they are built. TrackerControl doesn't just block many trackers, but it also allows fine control over which trackers are blocked, displays information about what companies the apps are contacting and where in the world they are, and also provides an option to contact the owner of the app with a template requesting personal data deletion in line with GDPR's rules. However as with any app, it is not perfect and occasionally breaks the functionality of apps (such as Instagram direct messages), but that's where the option to turn off particular trackers comes into use.<br />


