---
layout: post
title: "Secure your Smartphone"
---
# Securing your Android phone
_In today's modern world, a smartphone is a key to access a whole range of different aspects of the internet and the world around us, but should we trust in the safety of our data that is stored on a smartphone?_

There are many ways in which devices such as smartphones and tablets can be unsafe or leak information about who or where we are, or reveal when or how we are using applications. However there are also many ways in which we can secure ourselves from these issues.
<br /><span style="font-size:70%;"><i>Disclaimer: This blog is intended to be of help for the average person to improve the security of their data and to raise awareness of information security and how to reduce the amount of personal data collected about people. I am not an expert in computer security; if you are working in a situation where information security is critical or required, I strongly suggest you look elsewhere...</i></span>
## Problems and Solutions
Here are some of the problems associated with smartphones. Since there are quite a few, I will not spend too long looking at each one.
### System
**Problem:** Android phones run a version of Linux, and although Linux is generally considered a secure operating systems there are always problems with any system. Problems most often occur in older models of phones, as they are often unsupported by the company, meaning there will be no more updates to their security systems.
Furthermore, they are almost always changed to include the manufacturer's choice of applications and settings. For example a Google phone will come preinstalled and integrated with all Google apps, and there is no option to remove them easily and safely. The settings in a Google phone also rely on their services, and connect into most of the apps. While this can be useful to some, many people are concerned about Google's data collection policies.<br />
**Solution:** There are various solutions to using the pre-installed system. One solution is to install Lineage, a secure operating system that is very similar to standard Android versions. There are various positive aspects to this. It allows your device to run later versions of Android. So if you have an old device that only supports up to Android 8, it may be possible to upgrade it to Android 10 or even 11 by using Lineage. Another positive of Lineage is that the user has control over what apps and services they use. Although it does come pre-installed with system programs, they are all open source and do not interfere with the main system in the way that many apps do.<br />
However Lineage is only accessable if the phone is rooted, which may reduce security if not handled properly.

### Malware
**Problem:** In an up-to-date phone, installing apps from reputable sources such as Google Play Store doesn't generally cause malware issues, as apps are reviewed and scanned before being verified on the app store. Android is very secure as each app is run in it's own bubble (similar to Qubes), and cannot interfere with the system or other apps without root access, which is disabled by default. One issue is if the user accidentally downloads an app install-file - that contains a virus - from the internet. The app may intefere with the system such as sending messages without the user's permission, or trick the user into entering passwords or sensitive information.<br />
**Solution:** The main way to avoid downloading problematic software from the internet is always to use a reputable app store, and to make sure that the setting "allow installing from unknown sources" is turned off. If it is necessary to download an apk file from the internet to install, ensure that you turn the aforementioned setting off after installing it. To make sure it is safe, you should also upload it to a trusted virus scanner such as VirusTotal, and also search it's name online to ensure it is a safe application to install.<br />

### Tracking
**Problem:** Apps can track you using an alphanumeric ID that is specific to your device, called an Advertising ID. This means that if you watch an advert for example, and the app detects that you are interested in it, the app may sell this information to large companies. The data about what you are doing in the app, how long you are looking at adverts, and what ads interest you is very valuable for companies that target adverts at you. Applications may also collect data about how you are using the application, how much time you are spending on it, and your device specifications which it may send off to the developer.<br />
**Solution:** I have not personally researched much on this aspect, however I do definitely recommend using TrackerControl. This app is available from the Google Play Store, HOWEVER it does not block trackers due to the strict policies of Google Play. To get the version that blocks trackers, you must first install FDroid, which is a very useful app store and will prove essential in the effort to improve the security of your phone. All apps on FDroid are open-source, meaning they are free, and anyone can see how they are built. TrackerControl doesn't just block many trackers, but it also allows fine control over which trackers are blocked, displays information about what companies the apps are contacting and where in the world they are, and also provides an option to contact the owner of the app with a template requesting personal data deletion in line with GDPR's rules. However as with any app, it is not perfect and occasionally breaks the functionality of apps (such as Instagram direct messages), but that's where the option to turn off particular trackers comes into use.<br />

### Social Media
**Problem:** Social media applications, such as Instagram, WhatsApp, Gmail, Outlook, Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, etc. are unsafe, insecure, and often collect user data. Messaging services are generally unencrypted meaning that anyone at the company can observe the messages that you send, and store them and analyse them. Although WhatsApp is encrypted, it is generally discouraged since it is made by Facebook.<br />
**Solution:** There are two solutions to this: alternative clients and alternative services. Alternative clients get data from the services - such as YouTube or Instagram - and then allow you to interact with it as though you were using the original application. Alternative services are similar to the original service - such as Twitter - but have their own collection of users and data.<br />
**Suggested alternative clients:**
+ Instagram - Barinsta
+ YouTube   - NewPipe
**Suggested alternative services:**
+ Twitter   - Mastodon
+ WhatsApp  - Signal
+ Discord   - Telegram
+ Gmail     - ProtonMail
(This list will be added to later on)

### Internet Access
**Problem:** Many browsers and search engines - such as Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge with Bing - track your search history and have little protection against tracking. Some have the option to send a DNT (Do Not Track) request, which asks websites not to track you, however most websites ignore that request and continue to track your browsing habits and history.<br />
**Solution:** Use a browser such as Firefox, and ensure that you have the security settings to the "strict" setting. If you use Firefox don't forget to set the usage data collection to off. Make sure to use a search engine such as Duckduckgo. Set https-only mode to be always on. Install addons such as Privacy Badger, uBlock Origin, decentralise, Privacy Possum, and fingerprint blockers.<br />

### Internet Data
**Problem:** Websites can see your location, and your Internet Service Provider can see your browsing history. Your computer has a unique number called an IP address, and every website can see that address. It allows them to find out roughly where your computer is. Using a different computer creates a different IP address (sort of).<br />
**Solution 1:** Using a VPN such as Nord or ProtonVPN can greatly improve the security of your browsing. While VPNs do require payment, they are usually very cheap. Never use a free VPN (except ProtonVPN), as they will make your browsing LESS secure by selling your data, adding adverts to your phone, or even infecting your phone with malware, which is how they make money. VPN stands for Virtual Private Network. It is a network of many different computers all over the world that act as intermediaries between your computer and the website you are visiting. This uses the IP address of the VPN computer instead of yours, meaning the website only sees the location of the VPN computer, not your computer. The connections between your computer and the cloud when you access a webpage is encrypted, meaning that while it is travelling to another computer owned by the VPN provider, nobody can read it. This means that with a no-logs vpn such as ProtonVPN or Nord, the browsing cannot easily be traced back to you without using other means. <br />
**Solution 2:** Another solution which is similar to using a VPN is to use Tor. Although Tor is infamous for being the gateway to the dark web, it is incredibly secure as your internet access is encrypted multiple times and sent all around the world. Do not ever use it for malicious purposes, as it is obviously illegal to interact with most dark websites. Furthermore, I would strongly advise against using it for secure activities, such as banking or personal unencrypted messaging, since the network is often under attack from both malicious users and governmant agencies.<br />
**Keep yourself safe:** Despite popular belief, using a VPN or Tor does not necessarily hide your identity. If you sign into a site that you have accessed without using the VPN even once, it is easily possible to connect the two. For example if you sign into your personal email account while using a VPN, although it is still encrypted, the website will immediately know that it is you using it since it will have a record of past login locations. So if you are concerned about websites finding out your identity, always use seperate accounts for encrypted and unencrypted connections. Also if you are browsing using a VPN or other service, especially Tor, you must always make sure the web address starts in "HTTPS://" because browsing with only HTTP will destroy the benefit of having an encrypted connection, and allows hackers to easily get login or personal information. Another thing to note is that it is a good benefit to use two computers, one for using Tor or VPN on, and the other for any work that you do without a VPN, if any. Make sure that the one with the VPN or Tor on is a clean, fresh install of a common, up-to-date operating system such as Windows 10 or Ubuntu, and always change the size of the window each time you open a browsing tab and never browse in full-screen. I believe that Tor already changes the window size however. I would advise not to install any custom fonts or change any major system settings. If you are using Firefox, turn the anti-tracking settings to strict, as Firefox already has anti-fingerprinting methods built in. The extension NoScript Security Suite can also be helpful in reducing some fingerprinting or malicious JavaScript, however it could increase the likelyhood of fingerprinting unless you are using Tor which has NoScript built in.<br />

## Summary
Ending


